Welcome to pointers and references.
In this section of the course,
you'll learn how to use one of the
most powerful elements in the c++
programming language, the pointer.
Pointers give the programmer
the power to work directly
with the computer's memory.
And that includes allocating
and de-allocating memory
dynamically at runtime as
it's required by the program.
You might have heard horror stories
from other programmers about
pointers and how difficult they
can be to use and the damage they
can cause when used improperly,
you may have also heard that java
and python and other programming
languages don't have pointers because
they can cause so many issues.
C++ pointers give you more
power over your machine than
you could ever achieve with
languages like java and python.
Now that's not a knock on java or
python, it all comes down to why
the languages were created and what
domains they're typically used in.
C++ programs are used extensively
to develop operating systems,
system software, device drivers,
embedded systems and so forth.
With these systems, we want to be in
complete control over the hardware.
We don't want a virtual machine
handling memory or checking for
everything that could go wrong.
We just simply can't afford
that extra overhead at runtime.
With this power comes responsibility.
Responsibility to understand
how to use and release memory
efficiently and correctly.
And this is one of the main
use cases for pointers.
In this section, we'll learn
about what a pointer is.
Guess what? It's a variable.
That was easy right.
My point is that pointers are not
this mysterious concept that's
virtually impossible to understand.
Pointers are easy to
understand and use.
We just need to learn
to use them correctly.
The syntax around using pointers
is the part that can be a
little intimidating at first.
But as usual, I'll use my
handy drawing pad and walk
you through it all in detail.
We'll learn how to declare pointers,
store addresses in pointers and
de-reference pointers, that means
getting what they're pointing to.
Then we'll learn how to
allocate memory dynamically
from the heap or the free store.
This opens up a new
world of problem solving.
Then we'll talk about pointer
arithmetic and see how similar
pointers and arrays are.
We'll also learn to do pass by
reference with pointers this time.
And we'll also learn how the const
qualifier applies to pointers.
Finally, we'll talk about some of
the pointer potential pitfalls,
what can go wrong and what
kind of things can happen when
you use pointers incorrectly.
Then we'll switch over
and talk about references.
We've already seen references
when we talked about
functions in the last section.
Remember, how references are aliases.
In this section, we'll quickly
review what we learned about
references in the last section of
the course, and we'll see a few more
ways that we can use references.
Finally, everything we learn in
this section regarding pointers
is using c++ raw pointers.
There's a ton of code out there that
uses raw pointers, and it's important
to understand them completely.
But c++ also has smart pointers.
These are pointers that eliminate
many of the safety problems
with raw pointers but are
still very efficient to use.
While smart pointers are used
more often with object orientation
and are considered a more
advanced c++ topic, I'll provide
an overview in this section.
So that's it.
A lot to cover in this section,
but it's all very focused and
shouldn't take too long at all
before you completely understand
pointers and references.
First let's see exactly what a
pointer is in the next video.